Find more of the Art of Manliness:
 Browse
all Get Style          
 Browse
all Get Strong          
 Browse
all Get Social          
 Browse
all Get Skilled          
 in: Facial Hair, Style
  Jeremy Anderberg  • November 14, 2020 • Last updated: July 29, 2021


If you’ve spent any amount of time on the internet and fallen into the rabbit hole of the men’s grooming world, you’re well aware that beard oil is given a lot of real estate in terms of both content and online retail. Which naturally leads to some questions: Do these little expensive bottles of oil actually do anything? Do I really need to wade through the mountains of articles and pages and pages of different scents and formulas?
A couple of short answers: Yes, beard oil does do something. No, you don’t need to wade through all that other stuff. In this article I’m giving you the quick-hit answers to all your frequently asked beard oil questions. 
Let’s get right to it. 
Beard oil functions as both conditioner — to soften and moisturize the beard hair itself — and moisturizer for the skin underneath the beard, which is prone to drying out and general itchiness. Many beard oils also have a pleasing scent, which is nice, but doesn’t necessarily have any other practical benefit. Beard oil can also work to tamp down stray hairs that stick straight out, though balms/waxes are a little better for that purpose. 
Absolutely! When facial hair is just coming in, it can be even more irritated and prickly than when it’s grown in a bit more. There’s no harm in using oil on your stubble to help condition and moisturize both the hair and the skin. 
This question is entirely subjective based on what you like. If you see a list of “Best Beard Oils” online, it’s simply a list of what that author likes. That doesn’t make such recommendations less useful, just know that there’s no objectively “best” beard oil, or even a set of standards that set one apart from another. Simply watch out for any that claim to be a magic beard growing potion, and as with anything you’re applying to your skin and face, the more pronounceable the ingredients, the better. 
My personal favorite is MIG’s Man Face. I’ve been using it for years and haven’t really been tempted to try others. What can I say, I like what I like. 
It all depends on your beard, how prone your skin is to becoming dry, and where you live. Generally, the answer will be 1-3 times a day. If you’re applying it just once a day, in the morning after you shower is best. You can also apply at midday and before bed, as needed. If your face feels dry, apply more; if it ever feels too oily, scale it back a bit. You’ll figure out a good routine as you experiment. 
